Building an API pt. 4 - lesson 1: "Read One Book" updates (#156)
Ada-Developers-Academy/core-unit-2: api-4-read-update-delete/read-one-book-2.md

1. As a client, I want to send a request to get one existing book, so that I can see the `id`, `title`, and `description` of the book.

> We will refactor the `get_one_book` endpoint we designed in a prior lesson to make use of the data in our postgres database.

Author: We've been trying to minimize direct links between lesson that makes them more fragile, what do folks think of removing the links with this language?

Reviewer: I'm OK with removing it, but still do want to point out that Learn does validate links to other locatins in the curriculum (at least within the same unit, not sure about different units). For instance, if I add the link back in, and then rename the page it links to, Learn detects that the link is broken and displays a warning in the browser (even when I pare down the config.yaml during testing).

So while it's technically brittle, as we need to be sure to update links if we rename/move pages, Learn does help us detect the situation.

* `id` 
* `title`
* `description`

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Response Status</th>
    <th>Example Response Body</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><code>200 OK</code></td>
    <td><pre style="margin:0px;"><code>{
    "id": 1, 
    "title": "Fictional Book", 
    "description": "A fantasy novel set in an imaginary world."
}</code></pre>
    </td>
  </tr>
</table>

Now that we have an idea of what our endpoint should look like, we can turn our attention to how to implement it.

Our endpoint will need to:

1. Read the `book_id` in the request path
1. Retrieve the book with the matching `book_id` from the database
1. Format the book data into the appropriate structure (a single dictionary with `id`, `title`, and `description`)
1. Send back a response
2. Retrieve the book with the matching `book_id` from the database
3. Format the book data into the appropriate structure (a single dictionary with `id`, `title`, and `description`)
4. Send back a response

Our new route needs to read data from the incoming request path. Our existing route doesn't do this, so we'll need to add an entirely new route to our existing `Blueprint`.
Let's take a look at how our updated route will account for this!

> Our new route needs a **route parameter**. The route `/books/1` should give us the details for the book with `id` 1. `/books/2` should give us details for book with `id` 2, `/books/3000` should give us details for book 3000, and so on.

Author: This lesson looks like it was copy/pasted from Pt. 2 and only the necessary parts were updated. Through the lesson I've removed or re-organized fully duplicated sections like this.

</details>

| <div style="min-width:250px;"> Piece of Code </div> | Notes |
| --------------------------------------------------- | ----- |
| `@books_bp.get("/<book_id>")`                       | Unchanged from our previous hardcoded route. This decorator indicates that the function below it is a `GET` route that is registered with the `Blueprint` object named `books_bp`. |
| `"/<book_id>"`                                      | Unchanged from our previous hardcoded route. This is the `Blueprint` syntax to indicate a route parameter named `<book_id>`. The `<book_id>` placeholder shows that we are looking for a variable value which we can use in the function as the variable `book_id`. |

> | `def get_one_book(book_id):`                        | Unchanged from our previous hardcoded route. This function must have a parameter, `book_id`. This parameter name must match the route parameter in the decorator. It will receive the part of the request path that lines up with the placeholder in the route. |

Author: Looking for input on if these are useful or should be cut as repetitive.

Reviewer: This is only the second time we're looking at the get one book route, correct? (first hard coded, and now data-driven) I'm fine with folks having another opportunity to have the route param and such reviewed. You made some text changes that acknowledges they're not reading this in a vacuum, so my inclination would be to retain it.

| `query = ...`                                       | We store the `Select` object which represents our query for a single `Book` instance in the variable `query` |
| `... = db.select(Book) ...`                         | This syntax tells the `SQLAlchemy` object `db` to select all entries for the model `Book`. This method returns a `Select` object that represents the query we are building. |

> | `....where(Book.id == book_id)`                     | This is an example of building up a query by adding a where clause onto a `Select` object. We call the `where` method and pass it a comparison `Book.id == book_id` to use for filtering the results of our initial `Select` statement created by `db.select(Book)`. The `where` function will return a new `Select` object that is stored in the variable `query` |

Reviewer: I always get nervous with links to SqlAlchemy docs. They look different enough from how we access SqlAlchemy through the flask extension that it could be confusing. There's a lot of mental rearrangement we have to do that is easy to take for granted. But I do like their note that
> For boolean expressions, most Python operators such as ==, !=, <, >= etc. generate new SQL Expression objects, rather than plain boolean True/False values

So your plan sounds good to me.

> | `....where(Book.id == book_id)`                     | This is an example of building up a query by adding a where clause onto a `Select` object. We call the `where` method and pass it a comparison `Book.id == book_id` to use for filtering the results of our initial `Select` statement created by `db.select(Book)`. The `where` function will return a new `Select` object that is stored in the variable `query` |

Author: I added the following text higher in the lesson, right where we show the `query` declaration. It felt like a good space to tie it directly to the syntax as we introduced it without being squished in a table or slightly separated from code by a callout down here, but I'd love to hear what you think:

> Let's take a deeper look at our `where` method's parameter `Book.id == book_id`. In plain SQL we might have expressions in a WHERE clause such as `id = 3` or `title = Fictional Book`. SQLAlchemy allows us to compose SQL expressions like this by using the standard Python operators in conjunction with SQLAlchemy's `Column` class. For boolean expressions, most Python operators such as ==, !=, <, >= etc. generate new SQL Expression objects, rather than plain boolean True/False values. 
> 
> Re-reading our expression `Book.id == book_id`, we now know that this statement does not evaluate to a True/False value. `Book.id == book_id` is generating a SQL Expression object that can be applied when we execute `query`, where `Book.id` is a SQLAlchemy `Column` object representing the `id` column of our `Book` model.

<br/>

<details>
    <summary>Give the <code>validate_book</code> refactor a try, then click here to review our updated helper function and <code>get_one_book</code> route.</summary>

```python
@books_bp.get("/<book_id>")
def get_one_book(book_id):
    book = validate_book(book_id)

    return {
        "id": book.id,
        "title": book.title,
        "description": book.description,
    }

def validate_book(book_id):
    try:
        book_id = int(book_id)
    except:
        response = {"message": f"book {book_id} invalid"}
        abort(make_response(response , 400))

    query = db.select(Book).where(Book.id == book_id)
    book = db.session.scalar(query)
    
    if not book:
        response = {"message": f"book {book_id} not found"}
        abort(make_response(response, 404))

    return book
```

</details>

## Manually Testing the Get One Book Endpoint

As with our previous routes, we should practice using all the tools at our disposal to test our endpoints and investigate issues should they arise.

- Postman
- Flask Server logs
- `psql` interface

> - VS Code

Author: VS Code was in prior lists of tools to use when testing through the lesson series, my thinking was it was likely about placing print statements in routes so you can see info in the console.

> - VS Code

Reviewer: Do you know where the first time it was mentioned whether there was any additional context to that effect? If that purpose was established once elsewhere, then it feels fine to not mention it again here. But if we never said what using VSCode as a debug tool means, it would be nice to have that added somewhere.

> - VS Code

Author: It shows up first in Pt. 1 "Read All Books", but we don't have additional context, it's just a bulleted list in an info callout box. I'll add a ticket to the backlog to add more context.

> - Peers, classmates, and rubber ducks

Author: I know this section is small, but I wanted to have some shout out that we should be testing our updated endpoint. Does this seem okay, or is there another way folks might want to include that info/sentiment?

Reviewer: It's easy to get stuck and overlook something that could be helpful. Would your thought then be to continue calling these out in subsequent lessons? I could see this being a helpful reminder at first, but eventually folks will probably start skipping past them, or at the very least read them less carefully. This could result in missed materials, if there's new information presented going foward.

Author: You make a good point about it being repetitive and skipped over eventually. I think after this lesson we can leave it off until something changes and maybe just include a single sentence after the code is done along the lines of "Make sure to manually test your endpoints to ensure everything works as expected."?

Reviewer: Sounds good to me.

##### !end-question
##### !options

a| ```python
query = db.select(Note).order_by(Note.id)
note = db.session.scalar(query)
```
b| ```python
query = db.select(Note).where(Note.id)
note = db.session.scalar(query)
```
c| ```python
query = db.select(Note).where(Note.id == 1)
notes = db.session.scalars(query)
```
d| ```python
query = db.select(Note).where(Note.id == 1)
note = db.session.scalar(query)
```

##### !end-options
##### !answer

d|

##### !end-answer
##### !explanation

This is the only answer that:
1. Selects the Note table
2. Uses the `where` function to add filtering to our base query 
3. Provides the `where` function with the necessary parameter to find a Note record with an `id` of 1
4. Uses `scalar` to retrieve a single record as a Note model 

##### !end-explanation
### !end-challenge
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
### !challenge
* type: checkbox
* id: c41fcb67-2169-493c-9121-eac7498e1af7
* title: Read One Book
##### !question

Select all of the options below which are valid reasons for refactoring and using the helper function `validate_book`.

##### !end-question
##### !options

> a| Having a function with the single responsibility of checking if an `id` is valid then retrieving the `Book` record.
> b| Moving data validation and fetching out of the function `get_one_book`, so that `get_one_book` is focused on the unique work for the route.
> c| Knowing we will create further routes which will need to look up a `Book` record by `id`. 

Reviewer: I'm not sure why, but something about the way the prompt is worded really made the gerund-phrased answers sound really strange to me. I tried rewording the answers a bit.
```suggestion
a| Separating out the single responsibility of retrieving valid `Book` records allows us to encapsulate the validation logic, which could be complex, in a function with a self-documenting name.
b| Moving data validation and fetching out of the function `get_one_book`allows `get_one_book` to focus on the unique work for the route.
c| We know that we will create further routes which will need to look up a `Book` record by `id`. 
```

##### !end-options
##### !answer

a|
b|
c|

##### !end-answer
##### !explanation

> Each of these is a valid reason for separating out our code into helper functions! This change helps our functions to better align with the 'single responsibility principle' and helps to reduce repeated code across a project, making a project easier to maintain over time.

Reviewer: uses capitalization rather than scare quotes 😱. Consider bold or italics if further setting off is desired.
```suggestion
Each of these is a valid reason for separating out our code into helper functions! This change helps our functions to better align with the Single Responsibility Principle and helps to reduce repeated code across a project, making a project easier to maintain over time.
```

It turns out that when we execute a query which selects no book records `db.session.scalar(query)` returns `None`! This is handy since we can look at whether the result of executing our query is truthy or falsy, and act accordingly.

<br/>

<details>
    <summary>Give the <code>validate_book</code> refactor a try, then click here to review our updated helper function and <code>get_one_book</code> route.</summary>

```python
@books_bp.get("/<book_id>")
def get_one_book(book_id):
    book = validate_book(book_id)

    return {
        "id": book.id,
        "title": book.title,
        "description": book.description,
    }

def validate_book(book_id):
    try:
        book_id = int(book_id)
    except:
        response = {"message": f"book {book_id} invalid"}
        abort(make_response(response , 400))

    query = db.select(Book).where(Book.id == book_id)
    book = db.session.scalar(query)
    
    if not book:
        response = {"message": f"book {book_id} not found"}
        abort(make_response(response, 404))

    return book
```

> Even though `scalar` can return `None`, we don't need to worry about that case in our route function because it is already handled! `validate_book` takes care of that scenario by sending back a 404 response with `abort`, which prevents the rest of the route code from running.

Reviewer: 👍
